<h2 class="nobreak">PREFACES</h2>
</div>

<h3>I</h3>

<p>For years my consciousness of this
small piece of collaboration has been
very vague, almost impalpable, like
fleeting visits from a ghost. If I ever
thought of it, and I must confess that I
can hardly remember ever doing it on
purpose till it was brought definitely to
my notice by my Collaborator, I always
regarded it as something in the nature
of a fragment. I was surprised and
even shocked to discover that it was
rounded. But I need not have been.
Rounded as it is in form, using the word
form in its simplest sense—printed form—it
remains yet a fragment from its
very nature and also from necessity.
It could never have become anything
else. And even as a fragment it is but
a fragment of something else that might
have been—of a mere intention.</p>

<p>But, as it stands, what impresses me
most is the amount this fragment contains
of the crudely materialistic atmosphere
of the time of its origin, the time
when the <i>English Review</i> was founded.
It emerges from the depths of a past as
distant from us now as the square-skirted,
long frock-coats in which unscrupulous,
cultivated, high-minded
<i>jouisseurs</i> like ours here attended to
their strange business activities and
cultivated the little blue flower of
sentiment. No doubt our man was
conceived for purposes of irony; but
our conception of him, I fear, is too
fantastic.</p>

<p>Yet the most fantastic thing of all,
it seems to me, is that we two who had
so often discussed soberly the limits and
methods of literary composition should
have believed for a moment that a
piece of work in the nature of an analytical
confession (produced <i>in articulo
mortis</i> as it were) could have been
developed and achieved in collaboration!</p>

<p>What optimism! But it did not last
long. I seem to remember a moment
when I burst into earnest entreaties
that all these people should be thrown
overboard without more ado. This, I
believe, <i>is</i> the real nature of the crime.
Overboard. The neatness and dispatch
with which it is done in Chapter
VIII was wholly the act of my Collaborator’s
good nature in the face of
my panic.</p>

<p>After signing these few prefatory
words I will pass the pen to him in the
hope that he may be moved to contradict
me on every point of fact, impression,
and appreciation. I said “the
hope.” Yes, eager hope. For it would
be delightful to catch the echo of the
desperate, earnest and funny quarrels
which enlivened those old days. The
pity of it is that there comes a time
when all the fun of one’s life must be
looked for in the past.</p>

<p class="right">J. C.</p>

<p></p>

<h3>II</h3>

<p>No, I find nothing to contradict, for,
the existence of this story having been
recalled to my mind by a friend, the
details of its birth and its attendant
circumstances remain for me completely
forgotten, a dark, blind-spot
on the brain. I cannot remember the
houses in which the writing took place,
the view from the windows, the pen,
the table cloth. At a given point in my
life I forgot, literally, all the books I
had ever written; but, if nowadays I
re-read one of them, though I possess
next to none and have re-read few,
nearly all the phrases come back
startlingly to my memory and I see
glimpses of Kent, of Sussex, of Carcassonne—of
New York, even; and fragments
of furniture, mirrors, who knows
what? So that, if I didn’t happen to
retain, almost by a miracle, for me,
of retention, the marked up copy of
“Romance” from which was made the
analysis lately published in a certain
periodical, I am certain that I could
have identified the phrases exactly as
they there stand. Looking at the book
now I can hear our voices as we read
one passage or another aloud for purposes
of correction. Moreover I could
say: This passage was written in Kent
and hammered over in Sussex; this,
written in Sussex and worked on in
Kent; or this again was written in the
downstairs café and hammered in the
sitting room on the first-floor, of an
hotel that faces the sea on the Belgian
coast.</p>

<p>But of “The Nature of a Crime” no
phrase at all suggests either the tones
of a voice or the colour of a day. When
an old friend, last year, on a Parisian
Boulevard said: “Isn’t there a story
by yourself and Collaborator buried in
the So &amp; So?” I repudiated the idea
with a great deal of heat. Eventually
I had to admit the, as it were, dead
fact. And, having admitted that to
myself, and my Collaborator having
corroborated it, I was at once possessed
by a sort of morbid craving to get the
story re-published in a definitive and
acknowledged form. One may care
infinitely little for the fate of one’s
work and yet be almost hypochondriacally
anxious as to the form its publication
shall take—if the publication is
likely to occur posthumously. I became
at once dreadfully afraid that
some philologist of that Posterity for
which one writes, might, in the course
of his hyena occupations, disinter
these poor bones and, attributing sentence
one to writer A and sentence two
to B, maul at least one of our memories.
With the nature of <i>those</i> crimes one
is only too well acquainted. Besides,
though one may never read comments
one desires to get them over. It is
indeed agreeable to hear a storm rage
in the distance and rumble eventually
away.</p>

<p>Let me, however, since my Collaborator
wishes it and in the name of Fun
that is to-day hardly an echo, differ
from him for a shade as to the nature
of those passages of time. I protest
against the word: quarrels. There were
not any. And I should like to make
the note that our collaboration was
almost purely oral. We wrote and read
aloud the one to the other. Possibly
in the end we even wrote <i>to</i> read aloud
the one to the other: for it strikes me
very forcibly that “The Nature of a
Crime” is for the most part prose
meant for recitation, or of that type.</p>

<p>Anyhow, as the memory comes back
to me overwhelmingly, I would read
on and read on. One begins with a
fine propulsion. Sometimes that would
last to the end. But, as often as not,
by a real telepathy, with my eyes on
the page and my voice going on I would
grow aware of an exaggerated stillness
on the part of my Collaborator in the
shadows. It was an extraordinary kind
of stillness: not of death: not of an ice
age. Yes, it was the stillness of a
prisoner on the rack determined to
conceal an agony. I would read on,
my voice gradually sticking to my jaws.
When it became unbearable I would
glance up. On the other side of the
hearth I would have a glimpse of a
terribly sick man, of a convulsed face,
of fingers contorted. Guido Fawkes
beneath the <i>peine forte et dure</i> looked
like that. You are to remember that
we were very serious about writing. I
would read on. After a long time it
would come: “Oh!... Oh,
oh!... Oh my God....
My dear Ford.... My dear
faller....” (That in those days
was the fashionable pronunciation of
“fellow”.)</p>

<p>For myself, I would listen always
with admiration. Always with an admiration
that I have never since recaptured.
And if there were admirablenesses
that did not seem to me to fit in
with the given scene I could at least, at
the end of the reading, say with perfect
sincerity: “Wonderful! <i>How</i> you do
things!...” before beginning on:
“But don’t you perhaps think....”</p>

<p>And I really do not believe that
either my Collaborator or myself ever
made an objection which was not
jointly sustained. That is not quarrels.
When I last looked through the bound
proofs of <i>Romance</i> I was struck with the
fact that whereas my Collaborator
eliminated almost every word of action
and eighty percent of the conversations
by myself, I supplied almost all the
descriptive passages of the really collaborated
parts—and such softer sentiment
as was called for. And my
Collaborator let them get through.</p>

<p>All this took place long ago; most of
it in another century during another
reign; whilst an earlier but not less
haughty and proud generation were
passing away.</p>

<p class="right">F. M. F.</p>

<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">

<p class="ph3"><i>The Nature of<br/>
a Crime</i></p>
</div>


<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">

<p class="ph3"><i>The Nature of<br/>
a Crime</i></p>
</div>


<h2 class="nobreak">I</h2>

<p class="drop-cap">YOU are, I suppose, by now in
Rome. It is very curious how
present to me are both Rome and yourself.
There is a certain hill—you, and
that is the curious part of it, will
never go there—yet, yesterday, late in
the evening, I stood upon its summit
and you came walking from a place
below. It is always midday there:
the seven pillars of the Forum stand
on high, their capitals linked together,
and form one angle of a square. At
their bases there lie some detritus, a
broken marble lion, and I think but I
am not certain, the bronze she-wolf
suckling the two bronze children.
Your dress brushed the herbs: it was
grey and tenuous: I suppose you do not
know how you look when you are unconscious
of being looked at? But I
looked at you for a long time—at my
You.</p>

<p>I saw your husband yesterday at the
club and he said that you would not
be returning till the end of April.
When I got back to my chambers I
found a certain letter. I will tell you
about it afterwards—but I forbid you
to look at the end of what I am writing
now. There is a piece of news coming:
I would break it to you if I could—but
there is no way of breaking the utterly
unexpected. Only, if you read this
through you will gather from the tenor,
from the tone of my thoughts, a little
inkling, a small preparation for my disclosure.
Yes: it is a “disclosure.”</p>

<p>... Briefly, then, it was this
letter—a business letter—that set me
thinking: that made that hill rise before
me. Yes, I stood upon it and there
before me lay Rome—beneath a haze,
in the immense sea of plains. I have
often thought of going to Rome—of
going with you, in a leisurely autumn of
your life and mine. Now—since I have
received that letter—I know that I
shall never see any other Rome than
that from an imagined hilltop. And
when, in the wonderful light and shadelessness
of that noon, last evening, you
came from a grove of silver poplars, I
looked at you—<i>my</i> you—for a very
long while. You had, I think, a parasol
behind your head, you moved slowly,
you looked up at the capitals of those
seven pillars.... And I thought
that I should never—since you will not
return before the end of April—never
see you again. I shall never see
again the you that every other man
sees....</p>

<p>You understand everything so well
that already you must understand the
nature of my disclosure. It is, of
course, no disclosure to tell you that I
love you. A very great reverence is
due to youth—and a very great latitude
is due to the dead. For I am dead: I
have only lived through you for how
many years now! And I shall never
speak with you again. Some sort of
burial will have been given to me before
the end of April. I am a spirit. I
have ended my relations with the world.
I have balanced all my books, my will is
made. Only I have nothing to leave—save
to you, to whom I leave all that is
now mine in the world—my memory.</p>

<p>It is very curious—the world now.
I walked slowly down here from Gordon
Square. I walked slowly—for all my
work is done. On the way I met Graydon
Bankes, the K. C. It would have
astonished him if he could have known
how unreal he looked to me. He is six
feet high, and upon his left cheek there
is a brown mole. I found it difficult to
imagine why he existed. And all sorts
of mists hurried past him. It was just
outside the Natural History Museum.
He said that his Seaford Railway Bill
would come before Committee in June.
And I wondered: what is June?...
I laughed and thought: why June will
never come!</p>

<p>June will never come. Imagine that
for a moment. We have discussed the
ethics of suicide. You see why June
will never come!</p>

<p>You remember that ring I always
wear? The one with a bulging, greenish
stone. Once or twice you have
asked me what stone it was. You
thought, I know, that it was in bad
taste and I told you I wore it for the
sake of associations. I know you
thought—but no: there has never
been any woman but you.</p>

<p>You must have felt a long time ago
that there was not, that there could not
have been another woman. The associations
of the ring are not with the
past of a finished affection, or hate, or
passion, with all these forms of unrest
that have a term in life: they looked forward
to where there is no end—whether
there is rest in it God alone knows. If
it were not bad taste to use big words in
extremities I would say there was Eternity
in the ring—Eternity which is the
negation of all that life may contain of
losses and disappointments. Perhaps
you have noticed that there was one
note in our confidence that never responded
to your touch. It was that
note of universal negation contained
within the glass film of the ring. It is
not you who brought the ring into my
life: I had it made years ago. It was
in my nature always to anticipate a
touch on my shoulder, to which the
only answer could be an act of defiance.
And the ring is my weapon. I shall
raise it to my teeth, bite through the
glass: inside there is poison.</p>

<p>I haven’t concealed anything from
you. Have I? And, with the great
wisdom for which I love you, you have
tolerated these other things. You
would have tolerated this too, you who
have met so many sinners and have
never sinned....</p>

<p>Ah, my dear one—that is why I have
so loved you. From our two poles we
have met upon one common ground of
scepticism—so that I am not certain
whether it was you or I who first said:
“Believe nothing: be harsh to no one.”
But at least we have suffered. One
does not drag around with one such a
cannon-ball as I have done all these
years without thinking some wise
thoughts. And well I know that in
your dreary and terrible life you have
gained your great wisdom. You have
been envied; you too have thought:
Is any prospect fair to those among its
trees? And I have been envied for my
gifts, for my talents, for my wealth, for
my official position, for the letters after
my name, for my great and empty
house, for my taste in pictures—for my
... for my opportunities.</p>

<p>Great criminals and the very patient
learn one common lesson: Believe in
nothing, be harsh to no one!</p>

<p>But you cannot understand how
immensely leisurely I feel. It is one
o’clock at night. I cannot possibly be
arrested before eleven to-morrow morning.
I have ten hours in which, without
the shadow of a doubt, I can write
to you: I can put down my thoughts
desultorily and lazily. I have half a
score of hours in which to speak to you.</p>

<p>The stress of every secret emotion
makes for sincerity in the end. Silence
is like a dam. When the flood is at
its highest the dam gives way. I am
not conceited enough to think that I
can sweep you along, terrified, in the
rush of my confidences. I have not the
elemental force. Perhaps it is just that
form of “greatness” that I have lacked
all my life—that profound quality
which the Italians call <i>terribilita</i>. There
is nothing overpowering or terrible in
the confession of a love too great to be
kept within the bounds of the banality
which is the safeguard of our daily life.
Men have been nerved to crime for the
sake of a love that was theirs. The call
of every great passion is to unlawfulness.
But your love was not mine, and my
love for you was vitiated by that conventional
reverence which, as to nine
parts in ten, is genuine, but as to the
last tenth a solemn sham behind which
hide all the timidities of a humanity no
longer in its youth. I have been of my
time—altogether of my time—lacking
courage for a swoop, as a bird respects a
ragged and nerveless scarecrow. Altogether
a man of my time. Observe,
I do not say “our time.” You are of
all time—you are the loved Woman
of the first cry that broke the silence
and of the last song that shall mark the
end of this ingenious world to which
love and suffering have been given, but
which has in the course of ages invented
for itself all the virtues and all the
crimes. And being of this world and of
my time I have set myself to deal ingeniously
with my suffering and my love.</p>

<p>Now everything is over—even regrets.
Nothing remains of finite things but a
few days of life and my confession to
make to you—to you alone of all the
world.</p>

<p>It is difficult. How am I to begin?
Would you believe it—every time I left
your presence it was with the desire,
with the necessity to forget you.
Would you believe it?</p>

<p>This is the great secret—the heart
of my confession. The distance did
not count. No walls could make me
safe. No solitude could defend me;
and having no faith in the consolations
of eternity I suffered too cruelly from
your absence.</p>

<p>If there had been kingdoms to conquer,
a crusade to preach—but no. I
should not have had the courage to go
beyond the sound of your voice. You
might have called to me any time!
You never did. Never. And now it
is too late. Moreover, I am a man of
my time, the time is not of great deeds
but of colossal speculations. The moments
when I was not with you had
to be got through somehow. I dared
not face them empty-handed lest from
sheer distress I should go mad and begin
to execrate you. Action? What form
of action could remove me far enough
from you whose every thought was referred
to your existence? And as you
were to me a soul of truth and serenity
I tried to forget you in lies and excitement.
My only refuge from the tyranny
of my desire was in abasement.
Perhaps I was mad. I gambled. I
gambled first with my own money and
then with money that was not mine.
You know my connection with the great
Burden fortune. I was trustee under
my friend’s, Alexander Burden’s will.
I gambled with a determined recklessness,
with closed eyes. You understand
now the origin of my houses, of
my collections, of my reputation, of
my taste for magnificence—which you
deigned sometimes to mock indulgently
with an exquisite flattery as at something
not quite worthy of me. It was
like a break-neck ride on a wild horse,
and now the fall has come. It was
sudden. I am alive but my back is
broken. Edward Burden is going to
be married. I must pay back what I
have borrowed from the Trust. I cannot.
Therefore I am dead. (A mouse
has just come out from beneath one of
the deed-boxes. It looks up at me.
It may have been eating some of the
papers in the large cupboard. To-morrow
morning I shall tell Saunders to
get a cat. I have never seen a mouse
here before. I have never been here so
late before. At times of pressure, as
you know, I have always taken my
papers home. So that these late hours
have been, as it were, the prerogative
of the mouse. No. I shall not get a
cat. To that extent I am still a part
of the world: I am master of the fate of
mice!) I have, then, ten hours, less the
time it has taken me to chronicle the
mouse, in which to talk to you. It is
strange, when I look back on it, that in
all the years we have known each other—seven
years, three months and two
days—I have never had so long as ten
hours in which I might talk to you. The
longest time was when we came back
from Paris together, when your husband
was in such a state that he could neither
see nor hear. (I’ve seen him, by-the-bye,
every day since you have been gone.
He’s really keeping away from it wonderfully
well; in fact, I should say that he
has not once actually succumbed. I
fancy, really, that your absence is good
for him in a way: it creates a new set of
circumstances, and a change is said to
be an excellent aid in the breaking of a
habit. He has, I mean, to occupy himself
with some of the things, innumerable
as they are, that you do for him.
I find that he has even had his pass-book
from the bank and has compared
it with his counterfoils. I haven’t, on
account of this improvement, yet been
round to his chemist’s. But I shall certainly
tell them that they <i>must</i> surreptitiously
decrease the strength of it.)
That was the longest time we have ever
really talked together. And, when I
think that in all these years I haven’t
once so much as held your hand for a
moment longer than the strictest of
etiquette demanded! And I loved you
within the first month.</p>

<p>I wonder why that is. Fancy, perhaps.
Habit perhaps—a kind of idealism,
a kind of delicacy, a fastidiousness.
As you know very well it is not on account
of any moral scruples....</p>

<p>I break off to look through what I
have already written to you. There
is, first, the question of why I never told
you my secret: then, the question of
what my secret really is; I have started
so many questions and have not followed
one of them out to the very end.
But all questions resolve themselves
into the one question of our dear and
inestimable relationship.</p>

<p>I think it has been one of the great
charms of our relationship that all our
talks have been just talks. We have
discussed everything under the sun,
but we have never discussed anything
<i>au fond</i>. We have strayed into all sorts
of byways and have never got anywhere.
I try to remember how many evenings
in the last five years we have not spent
together. I think they must be less than
a hundred in number. You know how,
occasionally, your husband would wake
out of his stupors—or walk <i>in</i> his stupor
and deliver one of his astonishingly
brilliant disquisitions. But remember
how, always, whether he talked of free
love or the improvement in the breed
of carriage-horses, he always thrashed
his subject out to the bitter end. It
was not living with a man: it was
assisting at a performance. And, when
he was sunk into his drugs or when he
was merely literary, or when he was
away, how lazily we talked. I think
no two minds were ever so fitted one
into another as yours and mine. It is
not of course that we agree on all subjects—or
perhaps upon any. In the
whole matter of conduct we are so
absolutely different—you are always for
circumspection, for a careful preparation
of the ground, for patience; and
I am always ready to act, and afterwards
draw the moral from my own
actions. But somehow, in the end, it
has all worked out in our being in perfect
agreement. Later I will tell you
why that is.</p>

<hr class="tb"/>

<p>Let me return to my mouse. For
you will observe that the whole question
revolves, really, around that little
allegorical mite. It is an omen: it is a
symbol. It is a little herald of the
Providence that I do not believe in—of
the Providence you so implicitly seek
to obey. For instinctively you believe
in Providence—in God, if you will. I
as instinctively disbelieve. Intellectually
of course you disbelieve in a God.
You say that it is impossible for Reason
to accept an Overlord; I that Reason
forces one to accept an Overlord; that
Reason forces one to believe in an Omnipotent
Ruler—only I am unable to
believe. We, my dear, are in ourselves
evidence of a design in creation. For
we are the last word of creation. It has
taken all the efforts, all the birthpangs
of all the ages to evolve—you and me.
And, being evolved, we are intellectually
so perfectly and so divinely fashioned to
dovetail together. And, physically too,
are we not divinely meant the one for
the other? Do we not react to the
same causes: should not we survive the
same hardships or succumb to the same
stresses? Since you have been away I
have gone looking for people—men,
women, children, even animals—that
could hold my attention for a minute.
There has not been one. And what
purer evidence of design could you ask
for than that?</p>

<p>I have made this pact with the Providence
that I argue for, with the Providence
in whose existence I cannot
believe—that if, from under the castle of
black metal boxes, the mouse reappear
and challenge death—then there is no
future state. And, since I can find no
expression save in you, if we are not
reunited I shall no longer exist. So
my mouse is the sign, the arbitrament,
a symbol of an eternal life or the herald
of nothingness.</p>

<p>I will make to you the confession that
since this fancy, this profound truth,
has entered my mind, I have not raised
my eyes from the paper. I dread—I
suppose it is dread—to look across the
ring of light that my lamp casts. But
now I will do so. I will let my eyes
travel across the bundles of dusty
papers on my desk. Do you know I
have left them just as they were on the
day when you came to ask me to take
your railway tickets? I will let my eyes
travel across that rampart of blue and
white dockets.... The mouse is
not there.</p>

<p>But that is not an end of it. I am
not a man to be ungenerous in my dealings
with the Omnipotent: I snatch no
verdict.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">II</h2>
</div>

<p>Last night it was very late and I grew
tired, so I broke off my letter. Perhaps
I was really afraid of seeing that mouse
again. Those minute superstitions are
curious things. I noticed, when I
looked at the enumeration of these
pages to-night, I began to write upon the
thirteenth sheet—and that gives me a
vague dissatisfaction. I read, by-the-bye,
a paragraph in a newspaper: it
dealt with half-mad authors. One of
these, the writer said, was Zola; he was
stated to be half mad because he added
together the numbers on the backs of
cabs passing him in the street. Personally,
I do that again and again—and I
know very well that I do it in order to
dull my mind. It is a sort of narcotic.
Johnson, we know, touched his street-posts 
in a certain order: that, too, was
to escape from miserable thoughts.
And we all know how, as children, we
have obeyed mysterious promptings to
step upon the lines between the paving-stones
in the street.... But the
children have their futures: it is well
that they should propitiate the mysterious
Omnipotent One. In their day,
too, Johnson and Zola had their futures.
It was well that Johnson should
“touch” against the evil chance; that
Zola should rest his mind against new
problems. In me it is mere imbecility.
For I have no future.</p>

<p>Do you find it difficult to believe
that? You know the Burdens, of
course. But I think you do not know
that, for the last nine years, I have administered
the Burden estates all by
myself. The original trustees were old
Lady Burden and I; but nine years ago
Lady Burden gave me a power of attorney
and since then I have acted
alone. It was just before then that I
had bought the houses in Gordon
Square—the one I live in, the one you
live in, and the seven others. Well,
rightly speaking, those houses have
been bought with Burden money, and
all my pictures, all my prints, all my
books, my furniture, my reputation as
a connoisseur, my governorship of the
two charities—all the me that people
envy—have been bought with the Burden
money. I assure you that at times
I have found it a pleasurable excitement....
You see, I have wanted
you sometimes so terribly—so terribly
that the juggling with the Burden accounts
has been as engrossing a narcotic
as to Zola was the adding up of the
numbers upon the backs of cabs. Mere
ordinary work would never have held
my thoughts.</p>

<p>Under old Burden’s will young Edward
Burden comes of age when he
reaches the age of twenty-five or when
he marries with my consent. Well, he
will reach the age of twenty-five and he
will marry on April 5. On that day the
solicitors of his future wife will make
their scrutiny of my accounts. It is
regarded, you understand, as a mere
formality. But it amuses me to think
of the faces of Coke and Coke when they
come to certain figures! It was an
outlaw of some sort, was it not, who
danced and sang beneath the gallows?
I wonder, now, what sort of traitor, outlaw,
or stealthy politician I should have
made in the Middle Ages. It is certain
that, save for this one particular of property,
I should be in very truth illustrious.
No doubt the state shall come at
last in which there shall no more be any
property. I was born before my time.</p>

<p>For it is certain that I am illustrious
save in that one respect. To-day young
Edward Burden came here to the office
to introduce me to his <i>fiancée</i>. You
observe that I have robbed her. The
Burden property is really crippled.
They came, this bright young couple,
to get a cheque from me with which to
purchase a motor-car. They are to try
several cars in the next three weeks.
On the day before the wedding they
are to choose one that will suit them
best—and on the wedding-day in the
evening they are to start for Italy.
They will be coming towards you....
Then no doubt, too, a telegram will
reach them, to say that in all probability
motor-cars will be things not for
them for several years to come. What
a crumbling of their lives!</p>

<p>It was odd how I felt towards <i>her</i>.
You know his pompous, high forehead,
the shine all over him, the grave,
weighty manner. He held his hat—a
wonderful shiny, “good” hat—before
his mouth, for all the world as if he had
been in church. He made, even, a
speech in introducing Miss Averies to
me. You see, in a sense, he was in a
temple. My office enshrined a deity,
a divinity: the law, property, the rights
of man as maintained by an august
constitution. I am for him such a wonderfully
“safe” man. My dear one, you
cannot imagine how I feel towards him:
a little like a deity, a little like an avenging
Providence. I imagine that the
real Deity must feel towards some of
His worshippers much as I feel towards
this phœnix of the divines.</p>

<p>The Deity is after all the supreme
Artist—and the supreme quality of Art
is surprise.</p>

<p>Imagine then the feeling of the Deity
towards some of those who most confidently
enter His temple. Just imagine
His attitude towards those who deal in
the obvious platitudes that “honesty is
the best policy,” or “genius the capacity
for taking pains.” So for days the
world appears to them. Then suddenly:
honesty no longer pays; the
creature, amassing with his infinite
pains, data for his Great Work, is
discovered to have produced a work of
an Infinite Dulness. That is the all-suffering
Deity manifesting Himself to
His worshippers. For assuredly a day
comes when two added to two no longer
results in four. That day will come on
April 5 for Edward Burden.</p>

<p>After all he has done nothing to make
two and two become four. He has not
even checked his accounts: well: for
some years now I have been doing as
much as that. But with his <i>fiancée</i> it
is different. She is a fair, slight girl
with eyes that dilate under all sorts of
emotion. In my office she appears not
a confident worshipper but a rather
frightened fawn led before an Anthropomorphic
Deity. And, strangely
enough, though young Burden who
trusts me inspires me with a sardonic
dislike, I felt myself saying to this poor
little thing that faced me: “Why: I have
wronged you!” And I regretted it.</p>

<p>She, you see, has after all given something
towards a right to enjoy the Burden
estates and the Burden wealth; she
has given her fragile beauty, her amiability,
her worship, no doubt, of the
intolerable Edward. And all this payment
in the proper coin: so she has in a
sense a right....</p>

<p>Good-night, dear one, I think you
have it in your power—you <i>might</i> have
it in your power—to atone to this little
creature. To-morrow I will tell you
why and how.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">III</h2>
</div>

<p>I wrote last night that you have
something in your power. If you
wished it you could make me live on.
I am confident that you will not wish
it: for you will understand that capriciously
or intolerably I am tired of living
this life. I desire you so terribly that
now, even the excitement of fooling
Burden no longer hypnotizes me into
an acceptance of life without you.
Frankly, I am tired out. If I had to go
on living any longer I should have to
ask you to be mine in one form or other.
With that and with my ability—for of
course I have great ability—I could go
on fooling Burden for ever. I could restore:
I could make sounder than ever
it was that preposterous “going concern”
the Burden Estate. Unless I
like to let them, I think that the wife’s
solicitors will not discover what I have
done. For, frankly, I have put myself
out in this matter in order to be amusing
to myself and ingenious. I have
forged whole builder’s estimates for repairs
that were never executed: I have
invented whole hosts of defaulting tenants.
It has not been latterly for money
that I have done this: it has been simply
for the sheer amusement of looking at
Edward Burden and saying to myself:</p>

<p>“Ah: you trust me, my sleek friend.
Well....”</p>

<p>But indeed I fancy that I am rich
enough to be able to restore to them all
that I have taken. And, looking at
Edward Burden’s little <i>fiancée</i>, I was
almost tempted to set upon that weary
course of juggling. But I am at the
end of my tether. I cannot live without
you longer. And I do not wish to
ask you. Later I will tell you. Or
No—I will tell you now.</p>

<p>You see, my dear thing, it is a question
of going one better. It would be
easy enough to deceive your husband:
it would be easier still to go away together.
I think that neither you nor I
have ever had any conscientious scruples.
But, analysing the matter down
to its very depths, I think we arrive at
this, that without the motives for self-restraint
that other people have we
are anxious to show more self-restraint
than they. We are doing certain work
not for payment but for sheer love of
work. Do I make myself clear? For myself
I have a great pride in your image.
I can say to myself: “Here is a woman,
my complement. She has no respect
for the law. She does not value what a
respect for the law would bring her.
Yet she remains purer than the purest
of the makers of law.” And I think it
is the converse of that feeling that you
have for me.</p>

<p>If you desire me to live on, I will live
on: I am so swayed by you that if you
desire me to break away from this ideal
of you, the breath of a command will
send me round to your side.</p>

<p>I am ready to give my life for this
Ideal: nay more, I am ready to sacrifice
you to it, since I know that life for
you will remain a very bitter thing. I
know, a little, what renunciation means.</p>

<p>And I am asking you to bear it—for
the sake of my ideal of you. For, assuredly,
unless I can have you I must
die—and I know that you will not ask
me to have you. And I love you:
and bless you for it.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">IV</h2>
</div>

<p>I have just come in from <i>Tristan
and Isolde</i>.</p>

<p>I had to hurry and be there for the
first notes because you—my you—would,
I felt, be sitting beside me as
you have so often. That, of course, is
passion—the passion that makes us
unaccountable in our actions.</p>

<p>I found you naturally: but I found,
too, something else. It has always a
little puzzled me why we return to
Tristan. There are passages in that
thing as intolerable as anything in any
of the Germanic master’s scores. But
we are held—simply by the idea of the
love-philtre: it’s that alone that interests
us. We do not care about the
initial amenities of Tristan and the
prima donna: we do not believe in
Mark’s psychologising: but, from the
moment when those two dismal marionettes
have drained unconsideringly the
impossible cup, they become suddenly
alive, and we see two human beings
under the grip of a passion—acting as
irrationally as I did when I promised
my cabman five shillings to get me to
the theatre in time for the opening bars.</p>

<p>It is, you see, the love-philtre that
performs this miracle. It interests—it
is real to us—because every human
being knows what it is to act, irrationally,
under the stress of some passion or
other. We are drawn along irresistibly:
we commit the predestined follies or
the predestined heroisms: the other side
of our being acts in contravention of
all our rules of conduct or of intellect.
Here, in Tristan, we see such madness
justified with a concrete substance, a
herb, a root. We see a vision of a state
of mind in which morality no longer
exists: we are given a respite, a rest: an
interval in which no standard of conduct
oppresses us. It is an idea of an
appeal more universal than any other
in which the tired imagination of humanity
takes refuge.</p>

<p>The thought that somewhere in the
world there should be something that
I could give to you, or you to me, that
would leave us free to do what we wish
without the drag of the thought of what
we owe, to each other, to the world!
And after all, what greater gift could
one give to another? It would be the
essential freedom. For assuredly, the
philtre could do no more than put it in
a man’s power to do what he would do
if he were let loose. He would not bring
out more than he had in him: but he
would fully and finally express himself.</p>

<p>Something unexpected has changed
the current of my thoughts. Nothing
can change their complexion, which is
governed not by what others do but by
the action which I must face presently.
And I don’t know why I should use the
word unexpected, unless because at the
moment I was very far from expecting
that sort of perplexity. The correct
thing to say would be that something
natural has happened.</p>

<p>Perfectly natural. Asceticism is the
last thing that one could expect from
the Burdens. Alexander Burden, the
father, was an exuberant millionaire,
in no vulgar way, of course; he was
exuberant with restraint, not for show,
with a magnificence which was for private
satisfaction mainly. I am talking
here of the ascetic temperament which
is based on renunciation, not of mere
simplicity of tastes, which is simply
scorn for certain orders of sensations.
There have been millionaires who have
lived simply. There have been millionaires
who have lived sordidly—but miserliness
is one of the supreme forms of
sensualism.</p>

<p>Poor Burden had a magnificent physique.
The reserved abilities of generations
of impoverished Burdens, starved
for want of opportunities, matured
in his immense success—and all their
starved appetites too. But all the reserve
quality of obscure Burdens has
been exhausted in him. There was
nothing to come to his son—who at
most could have been a great match
and is to-day looked upon in that light,
I suppose, by the relations of his future
wife. I don’t know in what light that
young man looks upon himself. His
time of trial is coming.</p>

<p>Yesterday at eight in the evening he
came to see me. I thought at first he
wanted some money urgently. But
very soon I reflected that he need not
have looked so embarrassed in that case.
And presently I discovered that it was
not money that he was in need of. He
looked as though he had come, with
that characteristic gravity of his—so
unlike his father—to seek absolution
at my hands. But that intention he
judged more decorous, I suppose, to
present to me as a case of conscience.</p>

<p>Of course it was the case of a girl—not
his <i>fiancée</i>. At first I thought he
was in an ugly scrape. Nothing of the
kind. The excellent creature who had
accepted his protection for some two
years past—how dull they must have
seemed to her—was perhaps for that
reason perfectly resigned to forego that
advantage. At the same time, she was
not too proud to accept a certain provision,
compensation—whatever you
like to call it. I had never heard of anything
so proper in my life. He need
not have explained the matter to me at
all. But evidently he had made up his
mind to indulge in the luxury of a conscience.</p>

<p>To indulge that sort of conscience
leads one almost as far as indulged
passion, only, I cannot help thinking, on
a more sordid road. A luxury snatched
from the fire is in a way purified, but to
find this one he had gone apparently to
the bottom of his heart. I don’t charge
him with a particularly odious degree of
corruption, but I perceived clearly that
what he wanted really was to project
the sinful effect of that irregular connection—let
us call it—into his regulated,
reformed, I may say lawfully
blessed state—for the sake of retrospective
enjoyment, I suppose. This rather
subtle, if unholy, appetite, he was
pleased to call the voice of his conscience.
I listened to his dialectic exercises
till the great word that was sure
to come out sooner or later was pronounced.</p>

<p>“It seems,” he said, with every appearance
of distress, “that from a
strictly moral point of view I ought to
make a clean breast of it to Annie.”</p>

<p>I listened to him—and, by Heaven,
listening to him I <i>do</i> feel like the Godhead
of whom I have already written
to you. You know, positively he said
that at the very moment of his “fall”
he had thought of what <i>I</i> should think
of him. And I said:</p>

<p>“My good Edward, you are the most
debauched person I have ever met.”</p>

<p>His face fell, his soft lips dropped
right down into a horseshoe. He had
come to me as one of those bland
optimists <i>would</i> go to his deity. He
expected to be able to say: “I have
sinned,” and to be able to hear the
Deity say: “That’s all right, your very
frank confession does you infinite
credit.” His deity was, in fact, to
find him some way out of his moral
hole. I was to find him some genial
excuse; to make him feel good in his excellent
digestion once more. That was,
absolutely, his point of view, for at my
brutal pronouncement he stuttered:</p>

<p>“But—but surely ... the faults
of youth ... and surely there are
plenty of others?...”</p>

<p>I shook my head at him and panic
was dropping out of his eyes: “Can’t
I marry Annie honourably?” he quavered.
I took a sinister delight in turning
the knife inside him. I was going
to let him go anyhow: the sort of cat
that I am always lets its mice go.
(That mouse, by-the-bye, has never
again put in an appearance.)</p>

<p>“My dear fellow,” I said, “does not
your delicacy let you see the hole you
put me into? It’s to my interest that
you should not marry Miss Averies and
you ask me to advise you on the point.”</p>

<p>His mouth dropped open: positively
he had never considered that when he
married I lost the confounded three
hundred a year for administering the
Burden Trust. I sat and smiled at
him to give him plenty of time to let his
mind agonize over his position.</p>

<p>“Oh, hang it,” he said....
And his silly eyes rolled round my room
looking for that Providence that he
felt ought to intervene in his behalf.
When they rested on me again I said:</p>

<p>“There, go away. Of course it’s a
fault of your youth. Of course every
man that’s fit to call himself a man has
seduced a clergyman’s daughter.”</p>

<p>He said:</p>

<p>“Oh, but there was not anything
common about it.”</p>

<p>“No,” I answered, “you had an uncommonly
good time of it with your
moral scruples. I envy you the capacity.
You’ll have a duller one with Miss
Averies, you know.”</p>

<p>That was too much for him to take
in, so he smoothed his hat.</p>

<p>“When you said I was ... debauched
... you were only laughing
at me. That was hardly fair. I’m
tremendously in earnest.”</p>

<p>“You’re only play-acting compared
with me,” I answered. He had the air
of buttoning his coat after putting a
cheque into his breast pocket. He
had got, you see, the cheque he expected:
my applause of his successful seduction,
my envy of his good fortune. That
was what he had come for—and he got
it. He went away with it pretty bare-facedly,
but he stopped at the threshold
to let drop:</p>

<p>“Of course if I had known you would
be offended by my having recourse
to Annie’s solicitors for the settlement....”</p>

<p>I told him I was laughing at him
about that too.</p>

<p>“It was the correct thing to do, you
know,” were the words he shut the door
upon. The ass....</p>

<p>The phrase of his—that he had
thought of me at the moment of his fall—gives
you at once the measure of his
respect for me. But it gave me much
more. It gave me my cue: it put it
into my head to say he was debauched.
And, indeed, that is debauchery. For
it is the introduction of one’s morals
into the management of one’s appetites
that makes an indulgence of them debauchery.
Had my friend Edward regarded
his seduction as the thing he
so much desired me to tell him it was; a
thing of youth, high spirits—a thing we
all do—had he so regarded it I could not
really have called it debauchery. But—and
this is the profound truth—the
measure of debauchery is the amount of
joy we get from the indulgence of our
appetites. And the measure of joy we
get is the amount of excitement: if it
brings into play not only all our physical
but all our moral nature then we have
the crucial point beyond which no man
can go. It isn’t, in fact, the professional
seducer, the artist in seduction
that gets pleasure from the pursuit of
his avocation, any more than it is the
professional musician who gets thrills
from the performance of music. You
cannot figure to yourself the violinist,
as he fiddles the most complicated
passage of a concerto, when he really
surmounts the difficulty by dint of using
all his knowledge and all his skill—you
cannot imagine him thinking of his
adviser, his mother, his God and all the
other things that my young friend says
he thought about. And it is the same
with the professional seducer. He may
do all that he knows to bring his object
about—but that is not debauchery. It
is, by comparison, a joyless occupation:
it is drinking when you are thirsty. Putting
it in terms of the most threadbare
allegory—you cannot imagine that
Adam got out of the fall the pleasure
that Edward Burden got out of his bite
of the apple.</p>

<p>But Edward Burden, whilst he shilly-shallied
with “Shall I?” and “Sha’n’t
I?” could deliciously introduce into
the matter <i>all</i> his human relationships.
He could think of me, of his mother, of
the fact that potentially he was casting
to the winds the very cause for his existence.
For assuredly, if Edward Burden
have a cause for existence it is that
he should not, morally or physically, do
anything that would unfit him to make
a good marriage. So he had, along with
what physical pleasure there might be,
the immense excitement of staking his
all along with the tremendous elation of
the debate within himself that went
before. For he was actually staking his
all upon the chance that he could both
take what he desired and afterwards
reconcile it with his conscience to make
a good match. Well, he has staked and
won. That is the true debauchery.
That, in a sense, is the compensating
joy that Puritanism gets.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">V</h2>
</div>

<p>I have just come in. Again you will
not guess from where. From choosing
a motor-car with Burden and his
<i>fiancée</i>. It seems incredible that I
should be called upon to preside at
these preparations for my own execution.
I looked at hundreds of these
shiny engines, with the monstrously
inflated white wheels, and gave a half-amused—but
I can assure you a half-interested—attention
to my own case.
For one of these will one day—and soon
now—be arrested in a long rush, by my
extinction. In it there will be seated
the two young people who went with
me through the garages. They will
sit in some sort of cushioned ease—the
cushions will be green, or red, or blue in
shiny leather. I think, however, that
they will not be green—because Miss
Averies let slip to me, in a little flutter
of shy confidence, the words: “Oh,
don’t let’s have green, because it’s an
unlucky colour.” Edward Burden, of
course, suppressed her with a hurried
whisper as if, in thus giving herself
away to me, she must be committing a
sin against the house of Burden.</p>

<p>That, naturally, is the Burden tradition:
a Burden’s wife must possess
frailties: but she must feign perfection
even to a trusted adviser of the family.
She must not confess to superstitions.
It was amusing, the small incident, because
it was the very first attempt that
little Miss Averies has ever made to get
near me. God knows what Edward
may have made me appear to her: but
I fancy that, whatever Edward may
have said, she had pierced through
that particular veil: she realizes, with
her intuition, that I am dangerous.
She is alarmed and possibly fascinated
because she feels that I am not
“straight”—that I might, in fact, be
a woman or a poet. Burden, of course,
has never got beyond seeing that I
dress better than he does and choose a
dinner better than his uncle Darlington.</p>

<p>I came, of course, out of the motor-car
ordeal with flying colours—on these
lines. I lived, in fact, up to my character
for being orthodox in the matter
of comfort. I even suggested two little
mirrors, like those which were so comforting
to us all when we sat in hansom
cabs. That struck Burden as being
the height of ingenuity—and I know it
proved to Miss Averies, most finally,
that I am dangerous, since no woman
ever looks in those little mirrors without
some small motive of coquetry. It
was just after that that she said to me:</p>

<p>“Don’t you think that the little
measures on the tops of the new canisters
are extravagant for China tea?”</p>

<p>That, of course, admitted me to the
peculiar intimacy that women allow to
other women, or to poets, or to dangerous
men. Edward, I know, dislikes the
drinking of China tea because it is
against the principle of supporting the
British flag. But Miss Averies in her
unequal battle with this youth of the
classical features slightly vulgarized,
called me in to show a sign of sympathy—to
give at least the flicker of the
other side—of the woman, the poet, or
the pessimist among men. She asked
me, in fact, not to take up the cudgels
to the extent of saying that China tea
is the thing to drink—that would have
been treason to Edward—but she desired
that her instinct should be acknowledged
to the extent of saying that the
measures of canisters should be contrived
to suit the one kind of tea as well
as the other. In his blind sort of way
Edward caught the challenge in the
remark and his straight brows lowered
a very little.</p>

<p>“If you don’t have more than three
pounds of China tea in the house in a
year it won’t matter about the measures,”
he said. “We never use more
at Shackleton.”</p>

<p>“But it makes the tea too strong,
Edward.”</p>

<p>“Then you need not fill the measure,”
he answered.</p>

<p>“Oh, I wish,” she said to me, “that
you’d tell Edward not to make me make
tea at all. I dread it. The servants
do it so much better.”</p>

<p>“So,” I asked, “Edward has arranged
everything down to the last detail?”</p>

<p>Edward looked to me for approval
and applause.</p>

<p>“You see, Annie has had so little
experience, and I’ve had to look after
my mother’s house for years.” His air
said: “Yes! You’ll see our establishment
will be run on the very best lines!
Don’t you admire the way I’m taming
her already?”</p>

<p>I gave him, of course, a significant
glance. Heaven knows why: for it is
absolutely true that I am tired of appearing
reliable—to Edward Burden or
any one else in the world. What I want
to do is simply to say to Edward Burden:
“No, I don’t at all admire your
dragging down a little bundle of ideals
and sentiments to your own fatted
calf’s level.”</p>

<p>I suppose I have in me something
of the poet. I can imagine that if I
had to love or to marry this little Averies
girl I should try to find out what was
her tiny vanity and I should minister
to it. In some way I should discover
from her that she considered herself
charming, or discreet, or tasteful, or
frivolous, beyond all her fellows. And,
having discovered it, I should bend all
my energies to giving her opportunities
for displaying her charm, her discreetness
or her coquetry. With a woman
of larger and finer mould—with you!—I 
should no doubt bring into play my
own idealism. I should invest her with
the attributes that I consider the most
desirable in the world. But in either
case I cannot figure myself dragging
her down to my own social or material
necessities.</p>

<p>That is what Edward Burden is doing
for little Miss Averies. I don’t mean
to say that he does not idealize her—but
he sees her transfigured as the dispenser
of his special brand of tea or the
mother of the sort of child that he was.
And that seems to me a very valid reason
why women, if they were wise,
should trust their fortunes cold-bloodedly
and of set reason to the class
of dangerous men that now allure them
and that they flee from.</p>

<p>They flee from them, I am convinced,
because they fear for their worldly material
fortunes. They fear, that is to
say, that the poet is not a stable man of
business: they recognise that he is a
gambler—and it seems to them that it
is folly to trust to a gambler for life-long
protection. In that they are perhaps
right. But I think that no woman
doubts her power to retain a man’s
affection—so that it is not to the
reputation for matrimonial instability
that the poet owes his disfavour. A
woman lives, in short, to play with this
particular fire, since to herself she says:
“Here is a man who has broken the
hearts of many women. I will essay
the adventure of taming him.” And,
if she considers the adventure a dangerous
one, that renders the contest
only the more alluring, since at heart
every woman, like every poet, is a
gambler. In that perhaps she is
right.</p>

<p>But it seems to me that women make
a great mistake in the value of the
stakes they are ready to pay in order to
enter this game. They will stake, that
is to say, their relatively great coin—their 
sentimental lives; but they hoard
with closed fingers the threepenny bit
which is merely the material future.</p>

<p>They prefer, that is to say, to be
rendered the mere presiding geniuses of
well-loaded boards. It is better to
be a lady—which you will remember
philologically means a “loaf-cutter”—than
to be an Ideal.</p>

<p>And in this they are obviously wrong.
If a woman can achieve the obvious
miracle of making a dangerous man
stable in his affections she may well be
confident that she can persuade him to
turn his serious attention to the task
of keeping a roof over her head. Certainly,
I know, if I were a woman
which of the two types of men I would
choose. Upon the lowest basis it is
better for all purposes of human contracts
to be married to a good liar than
to a bad one. For a lie is a figurative
truth—and it is the poet who is the master
of these illusions. Even in the
matter of marital relations it is probable
that the poet is as faithful as the
Edward Burdens of this world—only
the Edward Burdens are more skilful
at concealing from the rest of the world
their pleasant vices. I doubt whether
they are as skilful at concealing them
from the woman concerned—from the
woman, with her intuition, her power
to seize fine shades of coolness and her
awakened self-interest. Imagine the
wife of Edward Burden saying to him,
“You have deceived me!” Imagine
then the excellent youth, crimsoning,
stuttering. He has been taught all his
life that truth must prevail though the
skies fall—and he stammers: “Yes: I
have betrayed you.” And that is tragedy,
though in the psychological sense—and
that is the important one—Edward
Burden may have been as faithful
as the ravens, who live for fifteen
decades with the same mate. He will,
in short, blunder into a tragic, false
position. And he will make the tragedy
only the more tragic in that all the
intellectual powers he may possess
will be in the direction of perpetuating
the dismal position. He will not be
able to argue that he has not been
unfaithful—but he will be able to find
a hundred arguments for the miserable
woman prolonging her life with him.
Position, money, the interests of the children,
the feelings of her family and of his—all
these considerations will make him
eloquent to urge her to prolong her misery.
And probably she will prolong it.</p>

<p>This, of course, is due to the excellent
Edward’s lack of an instinctive sympathy.
The poet, with a truer vision,
will in the same case, be able to face his
Miss Averies’ saying: “You have deceived me!”
with a different assurance.
Supposing the deflection to have been
of the momentary kind he will be able
to deny with a good conscience since he
will be aware of himself and his feelings.
He will at least be able to put the case
in its just light. Or, if the deflection
be really temperamental, really permanent,
he will be unable—it being his
business to look at the deeper verities—to
lie himself out of the matter. He
will break, strictly and sharply. Or, if
he do not, it may be taken as a sign that
his Miss Averies is still of value to him—that
she, in fact, is still the woman
that it is his desire to have for his companion.
This is true, of course, only in
the large sense, since obviously there are
poets whose reverence for position, the
interest of children or the feelings of
their friends and relatives, may outweigh
their hatred of a false position.
These, however, are poets in the sense
that they write verse: I am speaking of
those who live the poet’s life; to such, a
false position is too intolerable to be
long maintained.</p>

<p>But this again is only one of innumerable
side-issues: let me return to my
main contention that a dinner of herbs
with a dangerous man is better than
having to consume the flesh of stalled
oxen with Edward Burden. Perhaps
that is only a way of saying that you
would have done better to entrust yourself
to me than to—— (But no, your
husband is a better man than Edward
Burden. He has at least had the courage
to revert to his passion. I went
this afternoon to your chemists and
formally notified them that if they supplied
him with more than the exactly
prescribed quantity of that stuff, I, as
holding your power of attorney, should
do all that the law allows me to do
against them.)</p>

<p>Even to the dullest of men, marrying
is for the most part an imaginative act.
I mean marrying as a step in life
sanctioned by law, custom and that
general consent of mankind which is the
hall-mark of every irrational institution.
By irrational I do not mean wrong or
stupid. Marriage is august by the
magnitude of the issues it involves,
balancing peace and strife on the fine
point of a natural impulse refined by
the need of a tangible ideal. I am not
speaking here of mere domestic peace or
strife which for most people that count
are a question of manners and a mode
of life. And I am thinking of the peace
mostly—the peace of the soul which
yearns for some sort of certitude in this
earth, the peace of the heart which yearns
for conquest, the peace of the senses
that dreads deception, the peace of the
imaginative faculty which in its restless
quest of a high place of rest is spurred on
by these great desires and that great fear.</p>

<p>And even Edward Burden’s imagination
is moved by these very desires and
that very fear—or else he would not
have dreamt of marrying. I repeat,
marriage is an imaginative institution.
It’s true that his imagination is a poor
thing but it is genuine nevertheless.
The faculty of which I speak is of one
kind in all of us. Not to every one
is given that depth of feeling, that
faculty of absolute trust which <i>will not</i>
be deceived, and the exulting masterfulness
of the senses which are the mark
of a fearless lover. Fearless lovers are
rare, if obstinate, and sensual fools are
countless as grains of sand by the seashore.
I can imagine that correct
young man perfectly capable of setting
himself deliberately to worry a distracted
girl into surrender.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">VI</h2>
</div>

<p>I don’t know why, to-night in particular,
the fact that I am a dead man
occurs to me very insistently. I had
forgotten this for two whole days. If
any one very dear to you has ever been
<i>in extremis</i> at a distance and you have
journeyed to be at the last bedside, you
will know how possible this is—how for
hours at a time the mind will go wandering
away from the main fact that is
drawing you onwards, till suddenly it
comes back: someone is dying at a
distance. And I suppose one’s I is the
nearest friend that one has—and my I
is dying at a distance. At the end of a
certain number of days is the deathbed
towards which I am hurrying—it is a
fact which I cannot grasp. But one
aspect grows more clear to me every
time I return to this subject.</p>

<p>You remember that, when we have
discussed suicide, we have agreed that
to the man of action death is a solution:
to the man of thoughts it is none. For
the man of action expresses himself in
action, and death is the negation of action:
the man of thought sees the world
only in thoughts, and over thought
death exercises no solution of continuity.
If one dies one’s actions cease,
one’s problem continues. For that
reason it is only in so far as I am a man
of action that I shall be dying. You
understand what I mean—for I do not
mean that it is my actions that have
killed me. It is simply because I have
taken refuge from my thoughts in
action, and because after April 5 that
refuge will be closed to me, that I
take refuge in a final action which,
properly speaking, is neither action nor
refuge.</p>

<p>And perhaps I am no man of action
at all, since the action in which I have
taken refuge is properly speaking no
action at all, but merely the expression
of a frame of mind. I have gambled,
that is to say I have not speculated.
For the speculator acts for gain: the
gambler in order to interest himself.
I have gambled—to escape from you:
I have tried to escape from my thoughts
of you into divining the undivinable
future. For that is what gambling is.
You try for a rise: you try for a fall—and
the rise or the fall may depend on
the momentary madness of a dozen men
who declare a war, or upon the rain
from heaven which causes so many
more stalks of wheat to arise upon so
many million square inches of earth.
The point is that you make yourself
dependent upon caprice—upon the caprice
of the weather or upon the movement
in the minds of men more insane
than yourself.</p>

<p>To-day I have entered upon what is
the biggest gamble of my whole life.
Certain men who believe in me—they
are not Edward Burdens, nevertheless
they believe in me—have proposed to
me to form a corner in a certain article
which is indispensable to the daily life
of the City. I do not tell you what it
is because you will assuredly witness
the effects of this inspiration.</p>

<p>You will say that, when this is accomplished,
it will be utterly uninteresting.
And that is literally true:
when it is done it will be uninteresting.
But in the multiplicity of things that
will have to be done before the whole
thing is done—in the waiting for things
to take effect, in the failures perhaps
more than in the successes, since the
failures will imply new devising—in all
the meticulous thought-readings that
will be necessary, the interest will lie,
and in the men with whom one is
brought into contact, the men with
whom one struggles, the men whom one
must bribe or trick.</p>

<p>And you will say: How can I who am
to die in fourteen days embark upon an
enterprise that will last many months
or many years? That, I think, is very
simple.</p>

<p>It is my protest against being called
a man of action, the misconception that
I have had to resent all my life. And
this is a thought: not an action: a
thought made up of an almost infinite
number of erring calculations. You
have probably forgotten that I have
founded two towns, upon the south
coast: originated four railways in tropical
climates and one in the west of
England: and opened up heaven knows
how many mines of one kind or another—and
upon my soul I had forgotten
these things too until I began to cast
about in my mind. And now I go to
my death unmindful of these glories
in so far as they are concrete. In
that sense my death is utter: it is a
solution. But, in so far as they are my
refuges from you they remain problems
to which, if my ghost is to escape you,
I must return again and again.</p>

<p>In dying I surrender to you and thus,
for the inner self of myself, death is no
ending but the commencement of who
knows what tortures. It is only in
the latent hope that death is the negation
of consciousness that I shall take
my life. For death, though it can very
certainly end no problem, may at least
make us unconscious of how, eventually,
the problem solves itself. That,
you see, is really the crux of the whole
thing—that is why the man of action
will take refuge in death: the man of
thought, never. But I, I am the man
of neither the one nor the other: I am
the man of love, which partakes of
action and of thought, but which is
neither.</p>

<p>The lover is, perhaps, the eternal
doubter—simply because there is no
certain panacea for love. Travel may
cure it—but travel may cause to arise
homesickness, which of all forms of love
is the most terrible. To mix with many
other men may cure it—but again, to
the man who really loves, it may be a
cause for still more terrible unrest, since
seeing other men and women may set
one always comparing the beloved
object with the same thing. And, indeed,
the form that it takes with me—for
with me love takes the form of a desire
to discuss—the form which it takes
with me renders each thing that I see,
each man with whom I speak, the more
torturing, since always I desire to adjust
my thoughts of them by your
thoughts. I went down the other day—before
I had begun to write these
letters to you and before I knew death
impended so nearly over me—to the sea
at P—. I was trying to get rid of you.
I sat in the moonlight and saw the
smacks come home, visible for a minute
in the track of the moon and then no
more than their lights in the darkness.
The fishermen talked of death by drowning
mostly: the passage of the boats
across that trail of light suggested reflections,
no doubt trite. But, without
you to set my thoughts by, I could get
no more forward: I went round and
round in a ring from the corpses fished
up in the nets to the track of the moon.
And since walking up and down on the
parade brought me no nearer to you, I
did not even care to move: I neither
meditated nor walked, neither thought
nor acted. And that is real torture.</p>

<p>It was the next morning that I heard
that young Burden desired that his
<i>fiancée’s</i> solicitors should scrutinise the
accounts of the Burden Trust—and
Death loomed up before me.</p>

<p>You will ask: why Death? Why not
some alternative? Flight or prison?
Well: prison would be an unendurable
travelling through Time, flight, an
equally unendurable travelling through
Time with Space added. Both these
things are familiar: Death alone, in spite
of all the experience that humanity has
had of Death, is the utterly unfamiliar.
For a gambler it is a <i>coup</i> alluring beyond
belief—as we know neither what
we stake nor what we stand to win. I,
personally, stand to win a great deal,
since Life holds nothing for me and I
stake only my life—and what I seek
is only forgetfulness of you, or some sort
of eventual and incomprehensible union
with you. For the union with you that
I seek is a queer sort of thing; hardly
at all, I think, a union of the body, but
a sort of consciousness of our thoughts
proceeding onwards together. That we
may find in the unending Afterwards.
Or we may find the Herb Oblivion.</p>

<p>Either of these things I desire. For,
in so far as we can dogmatise about
Death we may lay it down that Death
is the negation of Action but is powerless
against Thought. I do not desire
Action: and at the same time I do not
fear Thought. For it is not my
thoughts of you that I fear: left alone
with them I can say: “What is she
more than any other material object?”
It is my feelings that wear out my brain—my
feelings that make me know that
you are more than every material object
living or still, and more than every
faith dead or surviving. For feeling
is neither Thought nor Action: it is the
very stuff of Life itself. And, if Death
be the negation of Life it may well be
the end of consciousness.</p>

<p>The worst that Death can do to me is
to deliver me up for ever to unsatisfied
longings for you. Well, that is all
that Life has done, that is all that Life
can do, for me.</p>

<p>But Life can do so much more that is
worse. Believe me when I say that I
dread imprisonment—and believe me
when I say that I do not dread disgrace.
For you know very well that it is true
when I say that I positively chuckle at
the thought of the shock my fall would
give to all these unawakened intelligences
of this world. You know how I
despise Edward Burden for trusting in
me; you know how I have always despised
other people who trusted in
established reputations. I don’t mean
to say that I should not have liked to
keep the game up, certainly I should,
since in gambling it is more desirable
to win than to lose. And it is more
amusing to fool fools than to give them
eye-openers. But I think that, in
gambling, it is only a shade less desirable,
<i>per se</i>, to lose than to win. The
main point is the sensation of either;
and the only valid objection to losing is
that, if one loses too often one has at last
no longer the wherewithal to gamble.
Similarly, to give people eye-openers is,
<i>per se</i>, nearly as desirable as to fool
them. It is not quite so desirable,
since the game itself <i>is</i> the fooling.
But the great objection in <i>my</i> case
is that the eye-opener would once and
for all put an end to the chance of
my ever fooling them again. That,
however, is a very small matter and
what I dread is not that. If people no
longer trusted in me I could no doubt
still find an outlet for my energies with
those who sought to take advantage of
my abilities, trusting to themselves to
wrest from me a sufficient share of the
plunder that they so ardently desire,
that I so really have no use for.</p>

<p>No, I seek in Death a refuge from
exposure not because exposure would
cripple my energies: it would probably
help them: and not because exposure
would mean disgrace; I should probably
find ironical satisfaction in it—but
simply because it would mean
imprisonment. That I dread beyond
belief: I clench my fingers when, in conversation,
I hear the words: “A long
sentence.” For that would mean my
being delivered up for a long time—for
ever—to you. I write “for ever”
advisedly and after reflection, since a
long subjection, without relief, to that
strain would leave upon my brain a
wound that must prove ineffaceable.
For to be alone and to think—those
are my terrors.</p>

<p>One reads that men who have been
condemned for long years to solitary
imprisonment go mad. But I think
that even that sad gift from Omnipotent
Fate would not be mine. As I figure
the world to myself, Fate is terrible
only to those who surrender to her. If
I surrendered, to the extent of living
to go to prison, then assuredly the
future must be uniformly heavy, uniformly
doomed, in my eyes. For I
would as soon be mad as anything else
I can think of. But I should not go
mad. Men go mad because of the
opportunities they miss: because the
world changes outside their prison
walls, or because their children starve.
But I have no opportunities to miss or
take: the changes of the world to me
are nothing, and there is no soul between
whom and starvation I could
stand.</p>

<p>Whilst I am about making this final
disposition of my properties—let me
tell you finally what I have done in regard
to your husband himself. It is a
fact—and this I have been keeping up
my sleeve as a final surprise for you—that
he is almost cured....</p>

<p>But I have just received an incomprehensible
note from Edward Burden.
He asks me for some particulars as to
his confounded estate and whether I
can lend him some thousands of pounds
at short notice. Heaven knows what
new scrape this is that he’s in. Of
course this may precipitate my crash.
But whatever happens, I shall find
time to write my final words to you—and
nothing else really matters....</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">VII</h2>
</div>

<p>I haven’t yet discovered what Edward
Burden is doing. I have found
him a good round sum upon mortgage—the
irony of the position being that the
money is actually his whilst the mortgage
does not actually exist. He says
that what he is doing with the money
will please me. I suppose that means
that he’s embarking upon some sort of
speculation which he imagines that I
would favour. It is odd that he should
think that I find gratification in his
imitating myself.</p>

<p>But why should I concern myself
with this thing at all? Nothing in the
world can ever please or displease me
any more. For I have taken my resolve:
this is my last night upon earth.
When I lay down this pen again, I
shall never take up any pen more.
For I have said all that I can say to
you. I am utterly tired out. To-night
I shall make up into a parcel all these
letters—I must sit through the night because
it is only to-morrow morning that
I shall be able to register the parcel to
you—and registering it will be my
last act upon the habitable globe. For
biting through the glass in the ring will
be not an action, but the commencement
of a new train of thought. Or
perhaps only my final action will come
to an end when you read these words in
Rome. Or will that be only thought—the
part of me that lives—pleading to
you to give your thoughts for company.
I feel too tired to think the matter out!</p>

<p>Let me, then, finish with this earth:
I told you, when I finished writing last
night, that Robert is almost cured. I
would not have told you this for the
sake of arrogating to myself the position
of a saviour. But I imagine that you
would like the cure to go on and, in the
case of some accident after my death, it
might go all to pieces once more. Quite
simply then: I have been doing two
things. In the first place I have persuaded
your chemists to reduce very
gradually the strength of chloral, so
that the bottles contain nearly half
water. And Robert perceives no difference.
Now of course it is very important
that he shall not know of the trick
that is being so beneficently played on
him—so that, in case he should go away
or for one reason or another change his
chemists, it must be carefully seen to
that instead of pure chloral he obtains
the exactly diluted mixture. In this
way he may be brought gradually to
drinking almost pure water.</p>

<p>But that alone would hardly be satisfactory:
a comparatively involuntary
cure is of little value in comparison
with an effort of the will. You may,
conceivably, expel nature with a fork,
but nothing but a passion will expel a
passion. The only point to be proved
is whether there exists in your husband
any other passion for the sake of which
he might abandon his passion for the
clearness of vision which he always says
his chloral gives him. He has not, of
course, the incentives usual to men:
you cannot, in fact, “get” him along
ordinary lines.... But apart
from his physical craving for the drug
he <i>has</i> that passion for clearness of intellect
that he says the drug gives him—and
it is through that, that at last, I
have managed to hit his pride.</p>

<p>For I have put it to him very strongly
that one view of life is just as good as
another—no better, no worse, but just
the same. And I have put it to him
that his use of chloral simply limits for
him the number of views of life that
he might conceivably have. And, when
you come to think of all the rhapsodies
of his that we have listened to, I think
that that piece of special pleading is
sufficiently justified. I do indeed honestly
believe that, for what it is worth,
he is on the road to salvation. He
means to make a struggle—to attempt
the great feat of once more seeing life
with the eyes that Fate originally gave
to him.</p>

<p>This is my legacy to <i>you</i>: if you ask
me why I have presented you with this
man’s new identity—since it <i>will</i> mean
a new identity—I must answer that I
simply don’t know. Why have we kept
him alive all these years? I have done
it no doubt because I had nothing to
give you. But you? If you have
loved me you must have wished him—I
won’t say dead—but no more there.
Yet you have tried too—and I suppose
this answer to the riddle is simply the
answer to the whole riddle of our life.
We have tried to play a supremely
difficult game simply because it sanctified
our love. For, after all, sanctification
arises from difficulties. Well, we
have made our way very strait and we
have so narrowed the door of entrance
that it has vanished altogether. We
have never had <i>any</i> hope of a solution
that could have satisfied us. If we had
cared to break the rules of the game, I
suppose we could have done it easily
enough—and we could have done it the
more easily since neither you nor I ever
subscribed to those rules. If we have
not it was, I think, simply because we
sought the difficulty which sanctifies....
Has it been a very imbecile
proceeding? I am most uncertain.
For it is not a thing to be very proud of—to
be able to say that for a whole lifetime,
one has abstained from that
which one most desired. On the other
hand, we have won a curious and
difficult game. Well—there it is—and
there is your legacy. I do not think
that there is anything else for me to
write about. You will see that, in my
will, I have left everything I possess to—Edward
Burden. This is not because
I wish to make him reparation,
and it’s not because I wish to avoid
scandal: it is simply because it may
show him—one very simple thing. It
will show him how very nearly I might
have made things come right. I have
been balancing my accounts very carefully,
and I find that, reckoning things
reasonably against myself, Edward
Burden will have a five-pound note with
which to buy himself a mourning-ring.</p>

<p>The being forced to attend to my
accounts will make him gasp a good deal.
It will certainly shake his belief in all
accepted reputations—for he will look
on the faces of many men each “as
solid as the Bank of England,” and he
will think: “I wonder if you are
like——?” His whole world will crumble—not
because I have been dishonest,
since he is coldblooded enough to believe
that all men may be dishonest.
But he will tremble because I have been
able to be so wildly dishonest and yet
to be so successfully respectable. He
won’t even dare to “expose” me, since,
if he did that, half of the shares which
he will inherit from me would suffer an
eclipse of disreputability, would tumble
to nothingness in value—and would
damage his poor pocket. He will have
to have my estate set down at a high
figure; he will have to be congratulated
on his fortunate inheritance, and he will
have, sedulously, to compound my
felony.</p>

<p>You will wonder how I can be capable
of this final cruelty—the most cruel
thing that, perhaps, ever one man did to
another. I will tell you why it is: it is
because I hate all the Edward Burdens
of the world—because, being the eternal
Haves of the world, they have made
their idiotic rules of the game. And
you and I suffer: you and I, the eternal
Have Nots. And we suffer, not because
their rules bind us, but because, being
the finer spirits, we are forced to set
ourselves rules that are still more strict
in order that, in all things, we may be
the truly gallant.</p>

<p>But why do I write: “You will wonder
how I can be capable of this.” You
will have understood—you who understand
everything.</p>

<p><i>Eight in the morning.</i>—Well: now we
part. I am going to register the parcel
containing all these letters to you. We
part: and it is as if you were dropping
back—the lost Eurydice of the world—into
an utter blackness. For, in a
minute, you will be no more than part
of my past. Well then: good-night.</p>
<hr class="chap x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter">


<h2 class="nobreak">VIII</h2>
</div>

<p>You will have got the telegram I
sent you long before you got the parcel
of letters: you will have got the note I
wrote you by the same post as the letters
themselves. If I have taken these
three days to myself before again writing
to you it has been because I have
needed to recover my power of thinking.
Now, in a way, I have recovered
it—and it is only fair to say that I have
devoted all my thoughts to how the
new situation affects you—and you in
your relations to me.</p>

<p>It places me in your hands—let that
be written first and foremost. You
have to decree my life or my death.
For I take it that now we can never get
back again into our old position: I have
spoken, you have heard me speak. The
singular unity, the silence of our old life
is done with for good. There is perhaps
no reason why this should not be so:
silence is no necessary part of our relationship.
But it has seemed to make
a rather exquisite bond between us.</p>

<p>It must, if I am to continue to live—it
must be replaced by some other
bond. In our silence we have seemed
to speak in all sorts of strange ways:
we have perhaps read each other’s
thoughts. I have seen words form
themselves upon your lips. But now
you must—there is no way out of it—you
<i>must</i> write to me. You must
write to me fully: all your thoughts.
You must, as I have done, find the
means of speech—or I can no longer
live....</p>

<p>I am reprieved!</p>

<p>I don’t know if, in my note to you, I
explained exactly what had happened.
It was in this way. I was anxious to
be done with my world very early and,
as soon as eight o’clock struck, I set out
for the post-office at the corner to
register that parcel of letters for you.
Till the task was accomplished—the
last I was to perform on earth—I
noticed nothing: I was simply in a
hurry. But, having given the little
fagot into the hands of a sleepy girl, I
said to myself suddenly: “Now I <i>am</i>
dead!” I began suddenly as they say
of young children, to “notice.” A
weight that I had never felt before
seemed to fall away from me. I
noticed, precisely, that the girl clerk
was sleepy, that, as she reached up one
hand to take the parcel over the brass
caging, she placed the other over her
mouth to hide a yawn.</p>

<p>And out on the pavement it was most
curious what had befallen the world.
It had lost all interest: but it had become
fascinating, vivid. I had not, you
see, any senses left, but my eyesight
and hearing. Vivid: that is the word.
I watched a newsboy throw his papers
down an area, and it appeared wonderfully
interesting to discover that <i>that</i>
was how one’s papers got into the
house. I watched a milkman go up
some doorsteps to put a can of milk
beside a boot-scraper and I was wonderfully
interested to see a black cat
follow him. They were the clearest
moments I have ever spent upon the
earth—those when I was dead. They
were so clear because nothing else
weighed on my attention but just
those little things. It was an extraordinary,
a luxuriant feeling. That, I
imagine, must have been how Adam
and Eve felt before they had eaten of
the fruit of knowledge.</p>

<p>Supposing I had tacitly arranged
with myself that I would die in the
street, I think I should still have walked
home simply to dally longer with that
delightful feeling of sheer curiosity.
For it was sheer curiosity to see how
this world, which I had never looked at,
really performed before utterly unbiassed
eyes.</p>

<p>That was why, when I got home, I
sent away the messenger that brought to
me Edward Burden’s letter; there was
to be no answer. Whatever Burden’s
query might be I was not going to commit
myself to any other act. My last
was that of sending off the parcel to
you.</p>

<p>My opening Burden’s letter when
the messenger had gone was simply a
part of my general curiosity. I wanted
to see how a Burden letter would look
when it no longer had any bearings at
all for me. It was as if I were going to
read a letter from that dear Edward
to a man I did not know upon a subject
of which I had never heard.</p>

<p>And then I was reprieved!</p>

<p>The good Edward, imagining that I
was seriously hurt at his having proposed
to allow his wife’s solicitors to
superintend my stewardship—the good
Edward in his concern had positively
insisted that all the deeds should be
returned to me absolutely unchecked.
He said that he had had a hard fight
for it and that the few thousands he
had borrowed from me had represented
his settlement, which he had thus paid
in specie....</p>

<p>It chimed in wonderfully with his
character, when I come to think of it.
Of course he was disciplining Miss
Averies’ representatives just as he had
disciplined herself in the matter of
China tea of which I have written to
you. And he had imagined that I was
seriously hurt! Can you figure to yourself
such an imbecile?</p>

<p>But, if you permit me to continue to
live, you will be saving the poor fool
from the great shock I had prepared
for him—the avalanche of discovery,
the earthquake of uncertainty. For
he says in that so kind way of his that,
having thus shown his entire confidence
in me—in the fact, that is, that Providence
is on the side of all Burdens—he
will choose a time in the future, convenient
for me, when he will go thoroughly
with me into his accounts. And
inasmuch as his wedding-tour will take
him all round the world I have at least
a year in which to set things straight.
And of course I can put off his scrutiny
indefinitely or deceive him for
ever.</p>

<p>I did not think all these things at
once. In fact, when I had read his
letter, so strong within me was the
feeling that it was only a mental phenomenon,
a thing that had no relation
with me—the feeling of finality was so
strong upon me that I actually found
myself sitting in that chair before I
realized what had occurred.</p>

<p>What had occurred was that I had
become utterly and for good your property.</p>

<p>In that sense only am I reprieved.
As far as Edward Burden is concerned
I am entirely saved. I stand before
you and ask you to turn your thumb up
or down. For, having spoken as I
have to you, I have given you a right
over me. Now that the pressing necessity
for my death is over I have to ask
you whether I shall plunge into new adventures
that will lead me to death or
whether I am to find some medium in
which we may lead a life of our own, in
some way together. I was about to
take my life to avoid prison: now prison
is no more a part of my scheme of existence.
But I must now have some
means of working towards you or I
must run some new and wild risk to
push you out of my thoughts. I don’t,
as you know, ask you to be my secret
mistress, I don’t ask you to elope with
me. But I say that you <i>must</i> belong
to me as much in thought as I have, in
this parcel of letters, been revealed and
given over to you. Otherwise, I must
once more gamble—and having tasted
of gambling in the shadow of death,
I must gamble for ever in that way. I
must, I mean, feel that I am coming towards
you or committing crimes that
I may forget you.</p>

<p>My dear, I am a very tired man. If
you know what it was to long for you
as I have longed for you all these years,
you would wonder that I did not, sitting
in that chair, put the ring up to my
teeth, in spite of Burden’s letter, and
end it. I have an irresistible longing for
rest—or perhaps it is only your support.
To think that I must face for
ever—or for as long as it lasts—this
troublesome excitement of avoiding
thoughts of you—that was almost unbearable.
I resisted because I had
written these letters to you. I love you
and I know you love me—yet without
them I would have inflicted upon you
the wound of my death. Having
written them I cannot face the cruelty
to you. I mean that, if I had died without
your knowing why, it would have
been only a death grievous to you—still
it is the duty of humanity and of
you with humanity to bear and to forget
deaths. But now that you must
know, I could not face the cruelty of
filling you with the pain of unmerited
remorse. For I know that you would
have felt remorse, and it would have
been unmerited since I gave you no
chance or any time to stretch out your
hands to me. Now I give it you and
wait for your verdict.</p>

<p>For the definite alternatives are these:
I will put Burden’s estate absolutely
clear within the year and work out, in
order to make safe money, the new and
comparatively sober scheme of which
I have written to you: that I will do if
you will consent to be mine to the extent
of sharing our thoughts alone. Or,
if you will not, I will continue to gamble
more wildly than ever with the Burden
money. And that in the end means
death and a refuge from you.</p>

<p>So then, I stand reprieved—and the
final verdict is in your hands.</p>